## I'm an international student. How do I get a Social Security Number?

TODO: Still being written and edited.

For students living in the Urbana-Champaign area applying for a SSN during the pandemic.

This guide was originally written as an instruction manual assignment for CS211 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

It has been adapted for Markdown.

---

### Why should I get a Social Security Number?

The process to get a Social Security Number (SSN) as an international student, especially during the pandemic, is difficult and unclear. However, there are many reasons for why a student would want to have an SSN. It is typically a strict requirement in the application process for many identity verification and banking services in the United States, and although there are often alternatives to using the SSN, they are usually more tedious and have significant caveats.

#### Non-comprehensive list of services that require a Social Security Number:

1. Driver's License (or State ID)
    * Uses:
        * Common as a proof of identity and age within the U.S.
    * Alternatives:
        * **Foreign Driver’s License:** Can be used for driving within Illinois, but if the license is not in English, a certified translation from an embassy or consulate may be required. Laws differ in other states.
          
          **Note:** Illinois **does not allow** driving with an International Driving Permit.
        * **Temporary Visitors Driver's License:** Not a proof of identity but can be used for driving.
        * **Passport:** Only a proof of identity. If lost, it is **much harder to replace** and can result in immigration-related difficulties and can affect the outcome of future visa applications.
2. Credit Cards (and other services requiring a Credit Report)
    * Uses:
        * Banks typically offer rewards and financial incentives for using card. Credit cards typically also offer greater protection against theft and fraud.
        * Credit reports are often required for renting property or lending services (loans, mortgages, etc.)
    * Alternatives:
        * **Student Credit Cards** that do not require an SSN. The selection will be limited with fewer benefits, with a typically higher repayment interest rate.
          
          **Note:** There are no physical bank branches in the Champaign-Urbana area offering these options.
3. Foreign Tax Status Review
    * Uses:
        * i.	Until completed, a portion (approximately 15-20%) of your employment income in the U.S. will be withheld every pay cycle. If you do not file a tax return, or if it was filed incorrectly, you may not receive a lower amount than you are entitled to.

### Prerequisites

The Social Security Administration (SSA) has a list of required conditions and documents you must satisfy before you can begin the application process. This guide will walk you through completing some of these requirements, but expects that some requirements have already been fulfilled.

Before continuing, ensure that you satisfy the conditions listed below. You must be:
1. Legally residing in the U.S. on a valid academic non-immigrant visa, such as the F-1, J-1 or J-2 visa.

   **Note:** If you are on a different immigration status, the information in this guide may not apply.
2. Currently legally employed within the U.S

   **Note 1:** If you are on a F-1 or J-1 visa, you are only allowed to work in university positions. If you are on a F-1 visa, you may also be eligible for off-campus employment with CPT/OPT work authorisations.
   
   **Note 2:** The university Virtual Job Board maintains a partial list of current open positions in university departments, including their job description, expected hours, and hourly pay. It is a good resource if you are looking for a job.
   
Additionally, you must have the following documents (**Document List A**):
1. Proof of Identity (Unexpired foreign passport and U.S. visa)
2. Proof of Age (Unexpired foreign passport or foreign birth certificate)
3. Proof of Immigration Status (Form I-551 or I-94)
4. (For F-1 visa) Proof of Nonimmigrant Student Status (Form I-20)
5. (For J-1/J-2 visa) Proof of Exchange Visitor Status (Form DS-2019)
6. Proof of Residence* (Lease, utilities bill, bank statement, etc.)
7. Bank Statement\*

\*This is not a listed requirement, but it may help your application process.

During this guide, you will be guided through the process of collecting the remaining documents required for your application. By the end of this process, you should have the following documents prepared (**Document List B**):
1.	Proof of Employment (+)
2.	Proof of Eligibility (+)
3.	Social Security Card Application (Form SS-5)

(+) Documents with this symbol must be dated within 30 days of your Social Security appointment.

The time required to collect the listed documents is approximately ten days. You should follow the order in the guide, as the application process for some documents require you to have other documents beforehand.

The appointment required for the application cannot be scheduled until all the documents are collected. Furthermore, the SSA may offer very limited options for appointment date and times. Some applicants have been offered only one time slot for the appointment.

Consider your own schedule and availability before you begin the guide.
